---
permalink: /
title: "About me"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---
Introduction
------
I want to liberate the power of data that are trapped in siloed systems and disciplines to improve human health. I am a computational 
scientist by training with extensive experience in model, method and system development for large clinical data analysis and research i
nfrastructure development in high performance computing system. My motivation to work in Mayo clinic arises from a deep desire to 
contribute in human well being, live life happily and abundantly. I want to use technology, big data and new methods to complement the 
deep clinical expertise for the future of medicine. 

Experience
------
I have an undergraduate degree in Computer Science and Engineering. After my undergraduate, I worked for a while as a software engineer, 
at a software company and also at National University of Singapore. Unsure about the direct impact of a software engineer in human well 
being, I started my PhD in Computational Science. It is at this time, I was introduced to clinical questions that require sophisticated 
technological skills such as mathematical modeling, data analysis in super computers, and complement that skill with clinical knowledge. 
It started with a project to detect hemorrhage from blood pressure data at the US Food and Drug Administration, and I never had to think 
again what I want to do in my life. I realized there is tremendous opportunity to use my skills in medicine. Since then, I have worked 
in many projects that uses EHR, physiological or sensor data for clinical research as the lead scientist. I have continued this as a 
Research Scientist at the Regenstrief Center for Healthcare Engineering at Purdue. 

Achievements
------
Here at Regenstrief, I have built the research infrastructure for data analysis from the ground up, established partnership with the 
Laboratory for Computational Physiology led by Roger Mark, and industry partnership for state of the art distributed database technology
with Paradigm4, founded by Turing Award recipient MIT Computer Scientist Mike Stonebroker. I have created a new line of research at RCHE
for explainable Artificial Intelligence (AI) in healthcare, and actively collaborating with Elias Bareinboim, professor of Computer 
Science. The goal is to introduce new methods of explainable AI developed by Turing Award recipient Judea Pearl, in clinical research.
Built on these foundations, I have secured a grant of 100,000 dollar to develop a cloud computing environment with HIPAA compliant 
servers for EHR and physiological data of thousands of patients from Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital. I have also secured a 300,000 dollar data science
initiative grant from Purdue  for explainable AI for clinical understanding and translation in healthcare.  At the same time, I have 
published many of these works in top journals and conferences, and many more are in the pipeline. I have also successfully submitted 
an NSF grant for reproducibility of data driven research with a budget of 2M dollar, with the application currently under review.


